Add support for Index & Range (#1369)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/expressions.md

> |  **Subclause**      | **Category**                     | **Operators**                                          |
> |  -----------------  | -------------------------------  | -------------------------------------------------------|
> |  [§12.8](expressions.md#128-primary-expressions)              | Primary                          | `x.y` `x?.y` `f(x)` `a[x]` `a?[x]` `x++` `x--` `x!` `new` `typeof` `default` `checked` `unchecked` `delegate` `stackalloc`  |
> |  [§12.9](expressions.md#129-unary-operators)              | Unary                            | `+` `-` `!x` `~` `^` `++x` `--x` `(T)x` `await x` |

> > |  §range-operator | Range | `..` |

Reviewer: Is the `..` operator the only operator with a variable number of operands (0, 1 or 2)? I hadn't thought about that before, and now that I have, I'm alarmed by it... (We have the same token used for unary and binary operators in a few cases, but we call those out as separate operators. We could *potentially* have four different operators here - one nonary, one binary, and two unary. Not suggesting we do that, but just planting the seed in case it somehow turns out to be useful.)

Reviewer: I see later we deem it to be a binary operator - presumably that's "we'll always think of it as binary, but both its operands are optional"?

Author: @jskeet – Yes it is a binary operator, with default values for missing arguments – its just the first operator to have default values for arguments.

When an operand occurs between two operators with the same precedence, the ***associativity*** of the operators controls the order in which the operations are performed:

- Except for the assignment operators, the range operator, and the null coalescing operator, all binary operators are ***left-associative***, meaning that operations are performed from left to right.
    > *Example*: `x + y + z` is evaluated as `(x + y) + z`. *end example*
- The assignment operators, the null coalescing operator and the conditional operator (`?:`) are ***right-associative***, meaning that operations are performed from right to left.
    > *Example*: `x = y = z` is evaluated as `x = (y = z)`. *end example*

> - The range operator is ***non-associative***.

Reviewer 2: A triple-star fence defines a new term, which is not what is intended here. I think we can get by without any emphasis.

Author: It is a term, joining the existing ***left-associative***, ***right-associate*** and ***associativity***; C# has just not needed this one until now. Unless you think all these, being standard terms, should not be terms in the Standard? Happy to de-term all of them if that is the consensus.

Author: Just a thought, should the following (not altered in this PR) line:

> Precedence and associativity can be controlled using parentheses.

use something other than “controlled” as it is not really controlling these but rather avoiding them being relevant/needed/applied/<insert your choice>?

If there is consensus on an alternative I can sneak it in in this PR…

Reviewer 2: Borrowing from Java, how about the following?

> Precedence and associativity can be indicated explicitly using parentheses.

Author: Having “Just a thought” is bad, I should know better ;-)

I think Java is getting it wrong as well, Wiki might be closer, it's the simple things that trip us up!

I’ll park this one here and have made a note to add (or not) and issue/PR. The line isn’t altered or affected by this PR.

Reviewer 3: Suggestion (draft):

> Sub-expressions enclosed in parentheses are evaluated and the result is combined with other sub-expressions following the rules of precedence and associativity.

Reviewer: Just to check, are we actually talking about two different topics here? One in terms of the sentence in line 175/178, and one still about whether non-associative should be a term?

Only asking to make sure we don't miss something to discuss.

Author: @jskeet – Yes, two topics – the issue for this PR is the introduction of ***non-associative***

Reviewer: - My suggestion below resolves whether or not to introduce non-associative (we will, including its meaning).
- We'll punt anything about parentheses

> - The range operator is ***non-associative***.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The range operator is ***non-associative***, meaning that neither the left nor right operand of a range operator may be a *range_expression*.
```

Author: In next commit

The ***overloadable unary operators*** are:

> > `+  -  !` (logical negation only) `~  ++  --  true  false`

Reviewer 3: I defer to Rex on the indent style here. Not sure what I think.

    ;
```

> *Note*: The postfix null-forgiving and prefix logical negation operators ([§12.9.4](expressions.md#1294-logical-negation-operator)), while represented by the same lexical token (`!`), are distinct. Only the latter may be overridden ([§15.10](classes.md#1510-operators)), the definition of the null-forgiving operator is fixed. *end note*

Reviewer: Should this be overloaded rather than overridden?

Author: Probably ;-) In next commit.

When recognising a *primary_expression* if both the *element_access* and *pointer_element_access* ([§23.6.4](unsafe-code.md#2364-pointer-element-access)) alternatives are applicable then the latter shall be chosen if the embedded *primary_expression* is of pointer type ([§23.3](unsafe-code.md#233-pointer-types)).

> The *argument_list* of an *element_access* shall not contain `out` or `ref` arguments.

Reviewer 3: ~~Did this rule move? Isn't it still true?~~ Found it. It's now line 2305.

- The *primary_expression* has compile-time type `dynamic`.
- At least one expression of the *argument_list* has compile-time type `dynamic`.

In this case the compile-time type of the *element_access* depends on the compile-time type of its *primary_expression*: if it has an array type then the compile-time type is the element type of that array type; otherwise the compile-time type is `dynamic` and the *element_access* is classified as a value of type `dynamic`. The rules below to determine the meaning of the *element_access* are then applied at run-time, using the run-time type instead of the compile-time type of those of the *primary_expression* and *argument_list* expressions which have the compile-time type `dynamic`. If the *primary_expression* does not have compile-time type `dynamic`, then the element access undergoes a limited compile-time check as described in [§12.6.5](expressions.md#1265-compile-time-checking-of-dynamic-member-invocation).

> *Example*:
>
> ```csharp
> var index = (dynamic)1; // index has compile-time type dynamic
> int[] a = {0, 1, 2};

> > var a_elem = a[index];  // dynamically bound, a_elem has compile-time type int

Reviewer: And presumably if `index` turns out to be a `Range` at execution time, we get an error rather than a new array. (That may well be covered earlier - just thinking out loud.)

Author: @jskeet – yes, see §12.3.1 where it is covered for all dynamic binding

> string s = "012";
> var s_elem = s[index];  // dynamcially bound, s_elem has compile-time type dynamic
> ```
>
> *end example*

If the *primary_expression* of an *element_access* is:

- a value of *array_type*, the *element_access* is an array access ([§12.8.12.2](expressions.md#128122-array-access));
- a value of `string` type, the *element_access* is a string access (§string-access);
- otherwise, the *primary_expression* shall be a variable or value of a class, struct, or interface type that has one or more indexer members, in which case the *element_access* is an indexer access ([§12.8.12.3](expressions.md#128123-indexer-access)).

#### 12.8.12.2 Array access

For an array access the *argument_list* shall not contain named arguments or by-reference arguments (§15.6.2.3).

The number of expressions in the *argument_list* shall be the same as the rank of the *array_type*, and each expression shall be:

- of type `int`, `uint`, `long`, or `ulong`; or
- for single rank array access only of compile-time type `Index` or `Range`; or

> - shall be implicitly convertible to one or more of the above types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- implicitly convertible to one or more of the above types.
```

Author: Thanks again, less of a mess this one, in next commit.

Indexing a single rank array using an expression of type `Index` or `Range` is *not* supported if the access is dynamically-bound (§12.8.12.1).

The run-time processing of an array access of the form `P[A]`, where `P` is a *primary_expression* of an *array_type* and `A` is an *argument_list* of index expressions, consists of the following steps:

- `P` is evaluated. If this evaluation causes an exception, no further steps are executed.
- For each index expression in the *argument_list* in order, from left to right:

>   - The index expression is evaluated, let the type of the resultant value be *T*;

Reviewer 3: nit: code fence, not italic:

```suggestion
  - The index expression is evaluated, let the type of the resultant value be `T`;
```

Author: @BillWagner – This was intentional, by habit, though its not what the Standard always does.The distinction here is that `P` represents some program text while *T* is a variable (in the mathematical sense) representing some type value. Anyway I’ll change them in the next commit unless @RexJaeschke tells me I don’t need to.

Author: Discussed and decided to keep stars.

>   - This value is then converted to the first of the types: `int`, `uint`, `long`, `ulong`, or for static bound single rank array access only `Index` or `Range`; for which an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) from *T* exists.

Reviewer 3: same:

```suggestion
  - This value is then converted to the first of the types: `int`, `uint`, `long`, `ulong`, or for static bound single rank array access only `Index` or `Range`; for which an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) from `T` exists.
```

Reviewer: Discussed and decided to keep stars.

  - If evaluation of an index expression or the subsequent implicit conversion causes an exception, then no further index expressions are evaluated and no further steps are executed.
- The value of `P` is checked to be valid. If the value of `P` is `null`, a `System.NullReferenceException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.
- If the preceding steps have produced a single index value of type `Range` then:
  - The result of evaluating the array access is a new array.
  - The starting and ending indices of the `Range` value are determined with respect to the length of the array referenced by `P`.

>   - If either index is out of range of the bounds of the array referenced by `P`, or the ending index comes before the starting index, then a `System.ArgumentOutOfRangeException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.

Reviewer 4: I assume we can index an empty array with 0..0, even if the array is empty. Also, the end index may be just past the array end.

Reviewer 4: Both the start index and the end index may be just beyond the last valid index.

https://sharplab.io/#v2:C4LgTgrgdgNAJiA1AHwAICYCMBYAUKgZgAIMiBhIgbzyNpPXSprpYEspgBtAXSIEMiAXipEADDCKYJ6CcQC+AbmYtaANz5giAIyH9OAFgB0h/dyW4VdVJgCcACi0BKcyzl45QA==

Author: Addressed in next commit.

>   - If either index is out of range of the bounds of the array referenced by `P`, or the ending index comes before the starting index, then a `System.ArgumentOutOfRangeException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.

Reviewer: We think this needs work:

```csharp
string[] x = { "", "" };

// Create an empty array
string[] y = x[0..0];
// Prints 0
Console.WriteLine(y.Length);

// Take an empty slice from index 0 (which isn't itself valid)
string[] z = y[0..0];
// Prints 0
Console.WriteLine(z.Length);

// Throws
string[] zz = y[2..2];
```

Reviewer: Basically, after resolving:

- The start and end indexes must be in the range 0 to "length of collection" *inclusive* (even though an index equal to the length of the collection is invalid *on its own*)
- The end shouldn't be before the start

Author: Addressed in next commit

>   - If either index is out of range of the bounds of the array referenced by `P`, or the ending index comes before the starting index, then a `System.ArgumentOutOfRangeException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.

Reviewer 3: Per conversation at the committee, this needs a bit of work. The following is valid:

```csharp
        int[] array = { 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 };
        int[] empty = { };

        var slice1 = array[0..0];
        Console.WriteLine(slice1.Length);
        var slice2 = empty[0..0];
        Console.WriteLine(slice2.Length);
```

Author: Addressed in next commit

>   - A new array is created from a shallow copy of the elements of `P` from the starting to ending indices, this is commonly referred to as a *slice*. This array becomes the results of the array access.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about talking about "slice" here - because in other contexts, a slice isn't a copy, but a view over the original collection. If we were to just remove the "this is commonly referred to as a slice" would that cause any problems elsewhere?

>   - A new array is created from a shallow copy of the elements of `P` from the starting to ending indices, this is commonly referred to as a *slice*. This array becomes the results of the array access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A new array is created from a shallow copy of the elements of `P` from the starting to ending indices. This array becomes the results of the array access.
```

Reviewer: (We just about agreed that it's worth removing here, even though it would be okay - but we're definitely not trying to remove it from extended indexes etc.)

> > > *Note:* A range of elements of an array cannot be assigned to using an array access. This differs from indexer accesses (§12.8.12.3) which may, but need not, support assignment to a range of indices specified by a `Range` value. *end note*

Reviewer 3: nit: one `>` instead of 2.

Author: @BillWagner – I think we indent notes relative to the thing they apply to, so within a list they should be indented relative to the bullet. So in the the next commit there are 3 `>`'s. I’ll leave it at that unless @RexJaeschke corrects my understanding.

- Otherwise:
  - The result of evaluating the array access is a variable reference (§9.5) of the element type of the array.
  - The value of each expression in the *argument_list* is checked against the actual bounds of each dimension of the array instance referenced by `P`. If one or more values are out of range, a `System.IndexOutOfRangeException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.
  - The variable reference of the array element given by the index expressions is computed, and this becomes the result of the array access.

#### §string-access String access

> For a string access the *argument_list* of an string access shall contain a single unnamed value argument (§15.6.2.2) which shall be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a string access the *argument_list* shall contain a single unnamed value argument (§15.6.2.2) which shall be:
```

(Or fix it some other way that avoids "an string access".)

Author: Thanks. Fixed in next commit to match the others:

> For a string access the *argument_list* of the *element_access* shall contain a single unnamed value argument (§15.6.2.2) which shall be:

- of type `int`; or
- of compile-time type `Index` or `Range`; or

> - implicitly convertible to one or more of the above types.

Reviewer 3: Should that also have a rule that by-reference arguments are prohibited?

Author: @BillWagner – Line 2278 says “unnamed value argument (§15.6.2.2)” which isn’t the same wording as line 2245 for arrays which is “shall not contain named arguments or by-reference arguments (§15.6.2.3)” but says the same thing. Is variety the spice of life here? Or not? (And if not which one is better?)

Reviewer: Resolving.

> - shall be implicitly convertible to one or more of the above types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a string access the *argument_list* of an string access shall contain a single unnamed value argument (§15.6.2.2) which shall be:

- of type `int`; or
- of compile-time type `Index` or `Range`; or
- implicitly convertible to one or more of the above types.
```

Author: Oops, nothing like leaving a big clue that this was edited multiple times and the value of not proofing reading your own writing, thanks for spotting. In the next commit.

> For a string access the *argument_list* of an string access shall contain a single unnamed value argument (§15.6.2.2) which shall be of type:
> 
> - of type `int`; or
> - of compile-time type `Index` or `Range`; or
> - shall be implicitly convertible to one or more of the above types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a string access the *argument_list* of an string access shall contain a single unnamed value argument (§15.6.2.2) which shall be:

- of type `int`; or
- of compile-time type `Index` or `Range`; or
- implicitly convertible to one or more of the above types.
```

Author: Dupe, I blame GitHub.

> Indexing a string using an expression of type `Index` or `Range` is *not* supported if the access is dynamically-bound (§12.8.12.1).

Reviewer 3: Is "not supported" the right language for the standard? Should we say it throws an exception? Is it undefined behavior?

Author: @BillWagner – Line 2281 states that the argument can have a *compile-time* type of `Index` or `Range`, while 2280 allows `int` without such a qualification. Line 2284 maybe should just be a *Note* as it echoes 2281, but I suspect the meeting might like to discuss whether this should be the spec so won’t change anything at this time.

(see also line 2251 & 2253 for a parallel case)

Reviewer: Resolved: remove this, and similar statements elsewhere.

The run-time processing of a string access of the form `P[A]`, where `P` is a *primary_expression* of `string` type and `A` is a single expression, consists of the following steps:

- `P` is evaluated. If this evaluation causes an exception, no further steps are executed.
- The index expression is evaluated, let the type of the resultant value be *T*;
- This value is then converted to the first of the types: `int`, or for static bound expressions only `Index` or `Range`; for which an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) from *T* exists.
- If evaluation of an index expression or the subsequent implicit conversion causes an exception, then no further index expressions are evaluated and no further steps are executed.
- The value of `P` is checked to be valid. If the value of `P` is `null`, a `System.NullReferenceException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.
- If the preceding steps have produced an index value of type `Range` then:
  - The result of evaluating the string access is a value of `string` type.

>   - The starting and ending indicies of the `Range` value are determined with respect to the length of the string referenced by `P`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The starting and ending indices of the `Range` value are determined with respect to the length of the string referenced by `P`.
```

Reviewer: (It looks like there are a lot of these. Of course, I may be wrong about what's correct...)

Author: There are lots, I blame the spellchecker, Rex noticed as well. All fixed in next commit.

  - If either index is out of range of the bounds of the string referenced by `P`, or the ending index comes before the starting index, then a `System.ArgumentOutOfRangeException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.
  - The result of the string access is a new string formed from a shallow copy of the characters of `P` from the starting to ending indicies, this is commonly referred to as a *substring*.
- Otherwise:
  - The result of evaluating the string access is a value of `char` type.
  - The value of the converted index expression is checked against the actual bounds of the string instance referenced by `P`. If the value is out of range, a `System.IndexOutOfRangeException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.
  - The value of character at the offset of the converted index expression with the string `P` becomes the result of the string access.

#### 12.8.12.3 Indexer access

> For an indexer access, the *primary_expression* of the *element_access* shall be a variable or value of a class, struct, or interface type, and this type shall implement one or more indexers that are applicable with respect to the *argument_list* of the *element_access*. The *argument_list* cannot contain `out` or `ref` arguments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For an indexer access, the *primary_expression* of the *element_access* shall be a variable or value of a class, struct, or interface type, and this type shall implement one or more indexers that are applicable with respect to the *argument_list* of the *element_access*. The *argument_list* shall not contain `out` or `ref` arguments.
```

Author: Thanks, in next commit.

> *Example*:
>
> ```csharp
> var index = (dynamic)1; // index has compile-time type dynamic
> int[] a = {0, 1, 2};
> var a_elem = a[index];  // dynamically bound, a_elem has compile-time type int
> string s = "012";
> var s_elem = s[index];  // dynamcially bound, s_elem has compile-time type dynamic
> ```
>
> *end example*

If the *primary_expression* of an *element_access* is:

> - a value of *array_type*, the *element_access* is an array access ([§12.8.12.2](expressions.md#128122-array-access));

Reviewer: Something bothers me about the first part of this sentence; it doesn't quite sit right with me.

Would "a value of an *array_type*" be better? I'm unsure.

Author: I’ll leave this one open. I suspect you’re reading this as “a value of an array type”? “a value of some array type” might also be OK. But “an *array_type*” seems wrong to me.

Reviewer 5: What about this rewording:

> If the type of the *primary_expression* of an *element_access* is:
>
> - *array_type*, ...
> - `string`, ...
> - otherwise, ...

Author: Changed to "an array type" in next commit

The run-time processing of an array access of the form `P[A]`, where `P` is a *primary_expression* of an *array_type* and `A` is an *argument_list* of index expressions, consists of the following steps:

- `P` is evaluated. If this evaluation causes an exception, no further steps are executed.
- For each index expression in the *argument_list* in order, from left to right:
  - The index expression is evaluated, let the type of the resultant value be *T*;
  - This value is then converted to the first of the types: `int`, `uint`, `long`, `ulong`, or for single rank array access only, `Index` or `Range`; for which an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) from *T* exists.
  - If evaluation of an index expression or the subsequent implicit conversion causes an exception, then no further index expressions are evaluated and no further steps are executed.
- The value of `P` is checked to be valid. If the value of `P` is `null`, a `System.NullReferenceException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.
- If the preceding steps have produced a single index value of type `Range` then:
  - Let *L* be the length of the array referenced by `P`.

>   - `A` is checked to be valid with respect to *L* (§24.3), if it is not then a `System.ArgumentOutOfRangeException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.

Reviewer: Possibly a period or semi-colon instead of a comma? (These feel like two complete sentences, effectively.)

Author: In the next commit

  - The starting offset, *S*, and number of items, *N*, for `A` with respect to *L* are determined as described for `GetOffsetAndLength` (§24.3).

>   - A new array is created from a shallow copy of the *N* elements of `P` starting at index *S*, if *N* is zero the new array has zero elements. This array becomes the result of the array access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A new array is created from a shallow copy of the *N* elements of `P` starting at index *S*. If *N* is zero the new array has zero elements. This array becomes the result of the array access.
```

Author: In next commit

>   - A new array is created from a shallow copy of the *N* elements of `P` starting at index *S*, if *N* is zero the new array has zero elements. This array becomes the result of the array access.

Reviewer 5: It's not required that a new array is created in the case where the range has zero elements. The current compiler defers this choice to RuntimeHelpers.GetSubArray, which returns a cached empty array instance if the range turns out to have zero length at runtime. (https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/v9.0.8/src/libraries/System.Private.CoreLib/src/System/Runtime/CompilerServices/RuntimeHelpers.cs#L26-L44)

Reviewer: We want to allow (but not require) the special-casing for a zero-size array, but a requirement for non-zero-size arrays.

We're okay with either this being fixed in this PR in a new commit, or @Nigel-Ecma raising a new issue and explicitly deferring.

Author: The Standard does not currently specify this behavior in other situations, e.g. for array creation (§12.8.16.5), so the issue needs to be addressed globally and not just here. PR #1403 has been spun off and this thread will be marked as resolved.

> > > > *Note:* Both *S* and *N* may be zero ($24.3). Indexing an empty array is usually invalid, however indexing with an empty range starting at zero is valid and returns an empty array. The defintion also allows *S* to be *L*, the past-end index (§24.1), in which case *N* will be zero and an empty array returned. *end note*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> > > *Note:* Both *S* and *N* may be zero (§24.3). Indexing an empty array is usually invalid, however indexing with an empty range starting at zero is valid and returns an empty array. The definition also allows *S* to be *L*, the past-end index (§24.1), in which case *N* will be zero and an empty array returned. *end note*
```

Reviewer: Committing this suggestion as it's uncontroversial.

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->

> > > > *Note:* A range of elements of an array cannot be assigned to using an array access. This differs from indexer accesses (§12.8.12.3) which may, but need not, support assignment to a range of indices specified by a `Range` value. *end note*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> > > *Note:* A range of elements of an array cannot be assigned to using an array access. This differs from indexer accesses ([§12.8.12.3](expressions.md#128123-indexer-access)) which may, but need not, support assignment to a range of indices specified by a `Range` value. *end note*
```

Author: Will be handled by tool

- Otherwise:

>   - The result of evaluating the array access is a variable reference (§9.5) of the element type of the array.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The result of evaluating the array access is a variable reference ([§9.5](variables.md#95-variable-references)) of the element type of the array.
```

Author: Will be handled by tool

  - The value of each expression in the *argument_list* is checked against the actual bounds of each dimension of the array instance referenced by `P`. If one or more values are out of range, a `System.IndexOutOfRangeException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.
  - The variable reference of the array element given by the index expressions is computed, and this becomes the result of the array access.

#### §string-access String access

> For a string access the *argument_list* of the *element_access* shall contain a single unnamed value argument (§15.6.2.2) which shall be:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a string access the *argument_list* of the *element_access* shall contain a single unnamed value argument ([§15.6.2.2](classes.md#15622-value-parameters)) which shall be:
```

Author: Will be handled by tool

- The index expression is evaluated, let the type of the resultant value be *T*;
- This value is then converted to the first of the types: `int`, `Index` or `Range`; for which an implicit conversion ([§10.2](conversions.md#102-implicit-conversions)) from *T* exists.
- If evaluation of an index expression or the subsequent implicit conversion causes an exception, then no further index expressions are evaluated and no further steps are executed.
- The value of `P` is checked to be valid. If the value of `P` is `null`, a `System.NullReferenceException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.
- If the preceding steps have produced an index value of type `Range` then:
  - The result of evaluating the string access is a value of `string` type.
  - Let *L* be the length of the string referenced by `P`.
  - `A` is checked to be valid with respect to *L* (§24.3), if it is not then a `System.ArgumentOutOfRangeException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.
  - The starting offset, *S*, and number of items, *N*, for `A` with respect to *L* are determined as described for `GetOffsetAndLength` (§24.3).

>   - The result of the string access is a new string formed by copying the *N* characters of `P` starting from *S*, if *N* is zero the new string is empty.

Reviewer 5: Similarly to the array case, when the length of the range is zero, a new string need not be formed. The current compiler defers to String.Substring which returns a cached empty string instance when then length turns out to be zero at runtime (https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/v9.0.8/src/libraries/System.Private.CoreLib/src/System/String.Manipulation.cs#L2241-L2256).

Reviewer: Same as above.

Author: Though the Standard does require *literal* strings in the *same* assembly that are equal, and two empty strings are clearly equal, to be the same object it does not require this for non-literal strings. If this issue is to be addressed it needs to be done globally and not just in this clause. PR #1403 has been spun off and this thread will be marked as resolved.

> > > > *Note:* Both *S* and *N* may be zero (§24.3). Indexing an empty string is usually invalid, however indexing with an empty range starting at zero is valid and returns an empty string. The defintion also allows *S* to be *L*, the past-end index (§24.1), in which case *N* will be zero and an empty string returned. *end note*

Reviewer 3: I think we've consistently used this form, which might be easier for the Word Converter:

```suggestion
    > *Note:* Both *S* and *N* may be zero (§24.3). Indexing an empty string is usually invalid, however indexing with an empty range starting at zero is valid and returns an empty string. The defintion also allows *S* to be *L*, the past-end index (§24.1), in which case *N* will be zero and an empty string returned. *end note*
```

Author: @jskeet – I made the switch both here and for the pair of notes just above on lines 2267 & 2271. In the latter case two different MD renderers (but they might of course use the same underlying library) messed up and formatted the second note as code.

So for now I will leave the `> > >` on them all, and if there is an issue with Word we can come up with a solution later. Is that OK?

Reviewer: Fine by me, yes.

- Otherwise:
  - The result of evaluating the string access is a value of `char` type.
  - The value of the converted index expression is checked against the actual bounds of the string instance referenced by `P`. If the value is out of range, a `System.IndexOutOfRangeException` is thrown and no further steps are executed.
  - The value of character at the offset of the converted index expression with the string `P` becomes the result of the string access.

#### 12.8.12.3 Indexer access

> For an indexer access, the *primary_expression* of the *element_access* shall be a variable or value of a class, struct, or interface type, and this type shall implement one or more indexers that are applicable with respect to the *argument_list* of the *element_access*. The *argument_list* shall not cannot contain `out` or `ref` arguments.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For an indexer access, the *primary_expression* of the *element_access* shall be a variable or value of a class, struct, or interface type, and this type shall implement one or more indexers that are applicable with respect to the *argument_list* of the *element_access*. The *argument_list* shall not contain `out` or `ref` arguments.
```

Reviewer: Nigel will apply.

  - If `I` is applicable with respect to `A` ([§12.6.4.2](expressions.md#12642-applicable-function-member)) and `S` is a class type other than `object`, all indexers declared in an interface are removed from the set.
- If the resulting set of candidate indexers is empty, then no applicable indexers exist, and a binding-time error occurs.
- The best indexer of the set of candidate indexers is identified using the overload resolution rules of [§12.6.4](expressions.md#1264-overload-resolution). If a single best indexer cannot be identified, the indexer access is ambiguous, and a binding-time error occurs.

> - The accesors of the best indexer are checked:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The accessors of the best indexer are checked:
```

(There are two more in the next few lines, with separate suggestions.)

Author: Thanks, fixed in next commit.

  - If the indexer access is the target of an assignment then the indexer must have a set or ref get accessor, if not a binding-time error occurs;

>   - Otherwise the indexer must have a get or ref get accesor, if not a binding-time arror occurs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Otherwise the indexer shall have a get or ref get accessor, otherwise a binding-time error occurs.
```

(I think that "shall" is right here? Happy to be corrected.)

Author: Thanks, fixed in next commit.

> The runtime processing of the indexer access consits of the following steps:

Reviewer 6: "consists"

Author: @KalleOlaviNiemitalo  – Thanks, corrected in next commit.

- The target *primary_expression* `P` is evaluated.
- The index expressions of the *argument_list* `A` are evaluated in order, from left to right.
- Using the best indexer determined at binding-time:
  - If the indexer access is the target of an assignment, the set accessor or ref get accessor is invoked to assign a new value ([§12.21.2](expressions.md#12212-simple-assignment)).

>   - In all other cases, the get accessor or ref get accesor is invoked to obtain the current value ([§12.2.2](expressions.md#1222-values-of-expressions)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - In all other cases, the get accessor or ref get accessor is invoked to obtain the current value ([§12.2.2](expressions.md#1222-values-of-expressions)).
```

Author: Thanks, fixed in next commit

> The result of processing the indexer access is an expression classified as an indexer access.

Reviewer: I strongly suspect this is correct, but is there a way of rewording it so it sounds like less of a truism?

Author: @jskeet – This particular sentence is a direct extract from the original word-salad I’m replacing (the text that did *all* the evaluation of indexing at binding-time, oops). Note that elsewhere we do already have “A *tuple_expression* is classified as a tuple.” 

I would be happy to simply remove it, whether something is classified as X or Y is sometimes stated, sometimes left to reading §12.2 *Expression classifications*.

Let’s see what the meeting says?

Reviewer: I think I'd be happy if this where "The result of processing the *indexer_access* is an expression classified as an indexer access". The difference in typographical style would make it more meaningful. But that may well not be valid here - I haven't checked. Yes, let's discuss in the meeting.

Reviewer: Nigel will remove this line.

  - If `I` is applicable with respect to `A` ([§12.6.4.2](expressions.md#12642-applicable-function-member)) and `S` is a class type other than `object`, all indexers declared in an interface are removed from the set.
- If the resulting set of candidate indexers is empty, then no applicable indexers exist, and a binding-time error occurs.
- The best indexer of the set of candidate indexers is identified using the overload resolution rules of [§12.6.4](expressions.md#1264-overload-resolution). If a single best indexer cannot be identified, the indexer access is ambiguous, and a binding-time error occurs.
- The accessors of the best indexer are checked:

>   - If the indexer access is the target of an assignment then the indexer shall have a set or ref get accessor, if not a binding-time error occurs;

Reviewer: Not thrilled about the comma here either, but within the context it's harder to fix.

Reviewer 5: How about this?
```suggestion
  - If the indexer access is the target of an assignment then the indexer shall have a set or ref get accessor. If not, a binding-time error occurs.
```

Reviewer: I'd suggest using "Otherwise" instead of "If not" but yes.

Author: Changed to “, otherwise,” in next commit

Each *initializer_target* is followed by an equals sign and either an expression, an object initializer or a collection initializer. It is not possible for expressions within the object initializer to refer to the newly created object it is initializing.

> In the *argument_list* of an *initializer_target* there is no implicit support for arguments of type `Index` (§24.4.2) or `Range` (§24.4.3).

Reviewer 6: OK, "implicit" here means this doesn't apply to the `Dictionary<Index, int>` initialisation <https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/605#issuecomment-2661142234>.

Author: @KalleOlaviNiemitalo – Correct, it only applies where C# is implicitly adding an indexer with `Index`/`Range`, not when a type has an explicit indexer taking `Index`/`Range`.

Reviewer 5: (This changes in C# 13: <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/whats-new/csharp-13#implicit-index-access>)

Lifted ([§12.4.8](expressions.md#1248-lifted-operators)) forms of the unlifted predefined bitwise complement operators defined above are also predefined.

### §hat-operator Hat/index from-end operator

> The unary `^` operator is called the *hat* (or *index from-end*) operator. The predefined hat operator is:

Reviewer: "index from-end" bothers me. Either "index from end" or "index-from-end" would be okay, but *only* hyphenating "from-end" feels weird. If no-one else is bothered, let's leave it - just thought I'd raise it as a niggle.

Reviewer: Looking at ranges.md, I'd be happier with "from-end index", where from-end is effectively a single adjective.

Author: Both uses here of “index from-end” switched to “from-end index” in the next commit.

```csharp

> Index operator ^(int x);

Reviewer 2: For the types `Index` and `Range`, unless we make a general statement somewhere that unadorned uses of these names mean `System.Index` and `System.Range`, we should explicitly qualify them. While my proposal chose the latter, I'm happy to go the former route instead. If we agree on the latter, I'll draft some words and figure out where to put them.

Author: The types are added to §C.5 which I think covers it. Also the intro and first use of the names in their respective descriptive clauses (§24.2 & §24.3) includes `System.` as I thought spelling them out would be helpful, also consistent with §C.5 I think but maybe not consistent with the rest of §24?

```

> The hat operator is not overloadable (§12.4.3).

Reviewer 3: While I'd prefer a single word, I'd prefer something like "reverse index" or something.

Author: It is called both the *hat* operator and the *index from end* operator in the various source materials, with the LDM at least recording a preference for the former at some point. I thought the latter was too much of a mouthful. Let’s see what the consensus is, remembering to consider list of definitions in §24.1 (from-start, from-end & past-end index) – hat (and other names/terms) are not fixed.

Author: I will leave this one unresolved as I don’t recall we discussed it. The question is should the term be:

- hat  (from source material and plenty of hits using DDG so it might qualify as lingua franca if we care ;-))
- from-end index (mainly for the index rather than the operator – from source material and also hits using DDG);
- reverse index (@BillWagner above); or
- something else?

Author: Spun off as #1404 and this conversation marked as resolved.

Lifted ([§12.4.8](expressions.md#1248-lifted-operators)) forms of the unlifted predefined bitwise complement operators defined above are also predefined.

### §hat-operator Hat operator

> The unary `^` operator is called the *hat* operator. The hat operator is not overloadable (§12.4.3) and there is a single predefined hat operator:

Reviewer 3: I'm still not thrilled with "hat operator". While I'm not sold on any of these, here are some alternatives:

- "end operator"
- "reverse index operator"
- "from end operator" (I like this one least)
- "tail end operator"

Reviewer: Interestingly, I like "from end operator" *most* as it corresponds with `Index.FromEnd`. (I could live with "index-from-end operator" as well, to be even clearer...)

Author: For the source of “hat” see `LDM-2018-02-14.md` & `LDM-2018-09-05.md` and a myriad of web pages that have adopted it. The advantage of the name is it *doesn’t* describe the operation at all but the shape of the symbol, whereas with a descriptive name folk will disagree on the chosen descriptive terms… ;-)

Reviewer 5: I'm most familiar personally with "the from-end operator" from design discussions, and I prefer it the most due to it describing exactly what it does.

Reviewer: Defer to a new issue. We considered "The unary `^` operator is called the *from-end* operator. (It is also sometimes known as the *hat* operator.)" That would aid searchability.

Author: Spun off as #1404 and this conversation marked as resolved.

```csharp
Index operator ^(int x);
```

The result of an operation of the form `^x` is a from-end `Index` (§24.2) value equivalent to the result of the expression:

```csharp
new Index(x, true)
```

> As with the other *unary_expression*s the operand may have a compile-time type of `dynamic` (§12.9.1) and be dynamically bound (§12.3.3). The compile-time type of the result is always `Index`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As with the other *unary_expression*s the operand may have a compile-time type of `dynamic` ([§12.9.1](expressions.md#1291-general)) and be dynamically bound ([§12.3.3](expressions.md#1233-dynamic-binding)). The compile-time type of the result is always `Index`.
```

Author: Will be handled by tool

An awaiter’s implementation of the interface methods `INotifyCompletion.OnCompleted` and `ICriticalNotifyCompletion.UnsafeOnCompleted` should cause the delegate `r` to be invoked at most once. Otherwise, the behavior of the enclosing async function is undefined.

## §range-operator Range operator

The `..` operator is called the *range* operator.

```ANTLR
range_expression
    : unary_expression
    | unary_expression? '..' unary_expression?
    ;
```

The predefined range operator is:

```csharp
Range operator ..(Index x, Index y);
```

> The range operator is not overloadable (§12.4.3).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The range operator is not overloadable ([§12.4.3](expressions.md#1243-operator-overloading)).
```

Reviewer 3: The tool will add this automatically.

All range expressions are treated as having the form `x..y`, where:

- `x` is the left operand if present, otherwise the expression `0`; and
- `y` is the right operand if present, otherwise the expression `^0`.

The result of the operation is a `Range` (§24.3) value equivalent to the result of the expression:

```csharp
new Range(x, y)
```

If either or both operands in a range expression have the compile-time type `dynamic`, then the expression is dynamically bound ([§12.3.3](expressions.md#1233-dynamic-binding)). The compile-time type of the result is always `Range`.

A lifted ([§12.4.8](expressions.md#1248-lifted-operators)) form of the range operator is also predefined.

> The range operator is non-associative (§12.4.2).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The range operator is non-associative ([§12.4.2](expressions.md#1242-operator-precedence-and-associativity)).
```

An awaiter’s implementation of the interface methods `INotifyCompletion.OnCompleted` and `ICriticalNotifyCompletion.UnsafeOnCompleted` should cause the delegate `r` to be invoked at most once. Otherwise, the behavior of the enclosing async function is undefined.

## §range-operator Range operator

The `..` operator is called the *range* operator.

```ANTLR
range_expression
    : unary_expression
    | unary_expression? '..' unary_expression?
    ;
```

The predefined range operator is:

```csharp
Range operator ..(Index x, Index y);
```

The range operator is not overloadable (§12.4.3).

All range expressions are treated as having the form `x..y`, where:

- `x` is the left operand if present, otherwise the expression `0`; and
- `y` is the right operand if present, otherwise the expression `^0`.

The result of the operation is a `Range` (§24.3) value equivalent to the result of the expression:

```csharp
new Range(x, y)
```

If either or both operands in a range expression have the compile-time type `dynamic`, then the expression is dynamically bound ([§12.3.3](expressions.md#1233-dynamic-binding)). The compile-time type of the result is always `Range`.

> A lifted ([§12.4.8](expressions.md#1248-lifted-operators)) form of the range operator is also predefined.

Reviewer 6: Toying with lifted operators:

```csharp
using System;
class C
{
    // means ^default(int), not ^default(int?)
    static Index? I => ^default;

    // means I..default(Index), not I..default(Index?)
    static Range? R => I..default;

    // error CS8310: Operator '*' cannot be applied to operand 'default'
    static int? K => ((int?)4) * default;
}
```

Does something in the specification explain why `default` is allowed as an operand in lifted `..` but not in lifted `*`?  Or is this a compiler bug?

Author: @KalleOlaviNiemitalo – Can you add an issue for this to be looked into? Or would you prefer we do it?

Reviewer 4: I believe the first two are target-typed, and the third is not.

Author: Given @gafter’s comment this *might* come down to `^` & `..` not being overloadable, while `*` is which requires both operands have types to resolve overloading. If that is correct I wouldn’t say it exactly jumps off the page…

Reviewer: Defer to a new issue.

Author: Issue #1405 spun off. This conversation will now be marked as resolved.

```ANTLR
multiplicative_expression

>     : range_expression

Reviewer 3: I'm very confused. This feels like it would allow many invalid constructs. What am I missing?

Author: Yes it does look weird as there are no pre-defined operators where it makes sense. However user-defined operators can give these meaning, and it also maintains the uniformity of the precedence rule stack/chain. I did produce test cases with such operators to make sure at least one compiler implements the support.

Note that `a..b..c` *is* forbidden, as that really is nonsense, however as ever parentheses are the enemy and `(a..b)..c` & `a..(b..c)` are syntactically correct but result in a compile-time type error.
